[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Petrea, a very warm welcome.
Thank you so much
for joining us.
>> It's a real pleasure, Jo.
Thank you.
>> Now, Petrea, you are the
founder of Quest for Life
Foundation.
>> That's right.
>> And I certainly want to
speak to you about the programs
and the retreats that
you run out of Quest,
but to start us off, could
you share with us part
of your journey that has led
you to really come to understand
the many aspects required in
order to work and deal with
people in places of
emotional and mental illness?
>> Hm.
Well, everyone's journey, of
course, is really individual.
And there's a big difference
between the bones of a person's
story and the flesh that
hangs off those bones.
So it's in the flesh that all
the emotions, and the fears,
and the anxieties often lie.
So I can rattle off the
bones really easily now,
having chewed on the flesh
a good deal over my life.
But I was born with
two older brothers,
and one of them, the one who
was 18 months older than I,
probably invented ADHD
20 years before anyone
knew what that was.
And so he spent his childhood
falling off the roof,
breaking bones, cutting himself,
setting fire to the house,
putting porridge on
his head every morning.
And so growing up
just after him,
I did my very best to be
as invisible as possible.
And when I was seven,
I had an experience
where I was just simply running
around the side of our house
with my pet dog when the
whole physical world became
completely insubstantial.
And there was something that
was the unifying principle,
or light.
Or love that
enlivened everything.
And yet I found it quite
confusing as a seven-year-old,
because I didn't have any
language to talk about it.
And so that remained as a
very private experience for me
for a very long time.
Before we were both
10, Brendan told me
that he knew he had to kill
himself by the time he was 30,
and I took that on
as my responsibility.
That's why I'm alive.
I'm here to keep Brendan safe.
And of course, that was a
mighty and unreasonable thing
for a little person to take on.
But I felt very deeply, I
have to grow up really quickly
so I can look after Brendan.
Interestingly, I grew 23
centimeters in the next year,
and that deranged the
bone growth in my legs,
and my knees swiveled in,
and started dislocating,
and I couldn't walk.
So I left school when I was
13 and went into hospital,
virtually for three years.
I had three months in hospital,
a month out, three months in,
a month out.
And they told me I'd
never walk again.
And I finally taught
myself to walk again,
which was quite a challenge
in itself, because I used
to unhook these weights
in between nurses' shifts
at night, and get out of bed,
and take my weight on my arms,
because my--
I'd been in traction
for nine months,
and I didn't have any
muscles in my legs.
And Brendan was already
experiencing depression
at this time.
And so for me, being
in hospital was great,
because I was away from Brendan.
It also got me out
of school, and I
wasn't really interested in
what they were teaching me
at school.
And it also got me
out of having to be
a teenager, because I felt like
I didn't know how to grow up.
Brendan was just ahead of
me, making a mess of it.
And so dealing
with physical pain
was something that
I found much easier
than dealing with the
emotional difficulties.
And I think from that earlier
experience when I was seven
and then I had a lot
of pain, obviously.
I developed a split
reality, where
I was someone very
privately to myself.
And then there was the me
that I kept highly polished
for everybody else.
And I was in calipers
and crutches for years.
And of course, everyone says,
oh, isn't she marvelous?
She's such an inspiration,
getting around
in her little calipers.
And that doesn't really
give you any space
to be anything
different from that.
And so that lonesome little girl
was very tender and ignored,
really, by the world, and
I was at pains not to draw
any attention to her at all.
I got finally out of hospital.
I went into nursing, which
wasn't very sensible after 12
major surgeries to my legs.
And I jiggered my back
lifting a patient.
And while I was in
a back brace, then
I was raped in a house
that was full of people.
And I was lying down
in one of the bedrooms,
and I just didn't have
a voice to call out.
And again, it was--
I was so used to splitting
off and going elsewhere,
that that's what I
did on that occasion.
Brendan was attempting suicide.
I got into drugs.
We lived overseas.
I was crippled with arthritis.
I used to walk with
walking sticks.
I changed my diet.
I learned to meditate
when I was 17,
and that's been a great
blessing in my life ever since.
I married some very
strange people.
I had two gorgeous children.
Brendan did finally
succeed in taking
his own life in Kathmandu after
many attempts and many times
of getting him to the
hospital or stopping
whatever was happening for him.
Then I moved to America with my
husband and two small children,
and we'd only been
there four weeks
when I thought he'd
gone for a long walk,
but he'd gone back to
Australia, and with the money,
and left me in a small geodesic
dome in a meditation community
with two small children.
And just after that,
I was diagnosed
with acute myeloid leukemia.
And I was relieved, because I
felt like, this was too hard.
I don't know how
to do a good life.
Maybe I can do a
good death, but be
blowed if I know how
to do a good life.
And when I was diagnosed,
I was told that I
had three months to live.
And it's a longer story, but
I came back to Australia.
My children went to
live with their father.
I moved in with my parents,
who took care of me
during that time.
And then it was my daughter who
came and sat on my bed one day,
and said, "Mum, you're sick.
If you need to
meditate to get well,
I think you should
go back to America."
And so that's what
I ultimately did.
And from there, I ended up in
a monastery outside of Assisi
in Italy in the
little cave where
St. Francis used to retreat to.
And I spent several
months in that little cave
meditating, and weeping,
and meditating, and weeping,
because in our family,
no matter what happened,
we never talked about our
feelings, and we never cried.
I don't remember ever crying
before I was in that cave,
and that's where my
whole life came unstuck.
And so I'd like to
say that was the end
of the bones of the story.
There's been plenty
more since then.
Unexpected, unthinkable,
unimaginable things
happen on a regular
basis, but that's just
the nature of being human.
>> So in amongst all of the
adversity and the trauma that
your own life has experienced,
you've also become
a naturopath, a herbalist,
a teacher of meditation.
You've written eight
bestsellers, probably one--
the most well-known and the one
I love the most is "Your Life
Matters."
And I guess when you say after
your diagnosis with leukemia
and you went to a
cave to meditate,
was that the process of
you healing from leukemia?
Or did you go through
other forms of treatment
at the same time in
conjunction with--
>> Mm.
No.
When I was diagnosed,
I was told that there
was no treatment
that would give me
either a remission or a
cure, but that would probably
extend my life by a few weeks.
And given that I was still
grief-stricken and pretty
depressed at the time,
I felt that I'd rather
die having the reality of
my own experience untainted
by feeling sick from drugs,
having done many of them
myself in the past.
And also, I'd become
a vegetarian at 17.
I'd learned to meditate at 17.
I'd become a herbalist, and
naturopath, and yoga meditation
teacher.
All of those things, really,
to help me find my own health
and regain my own health.
And I remember the first
night I came up from the cave.
In fact, the old priest that
was there looked after me,
and he'd kind of dragged
me up the stairs,
because I think he
was a bit worried.
He had this pale divorced
Anglican holed up
in his little Catholic cave,
and that if I died in there,
it would be very bad for--
>> Not a good look.
>> --for business.
And so he prepared
a meal for me.
And on the plate,
there was meat,
and I hadn't eaten
meat for 15 years.
There was a big
chunk of white bread.
And as a natural path,
I'd been telling everyone
for years, the whiter the
bread, the sooner you're dead.
There was a goblet of wine.
I hadn't drank alcohol, tea,
coffee, nothing for 15 years.
So it was like my whole
belief system on the platter,
and I realized that I
know zip about anything.
And for all my studying,
for all my research,
for all my qualifications
or whatever,
I know zip about anything.
And I realized that for
me, it was far more healing
to be grateful for what had
been lovingly prepared for me
rather than to say,
my belief system says
I can't have what you've
lovingly prepared for me,
because I have to do it my way.
And my way was a very
rigid, challenging--
I always set very high
standards for myself
and was pretty uncompassionate,
unkind to myself.
So it was a major
turning point for me,
one of many, many
turning points.
So I don't think there was
any one experience that
was profoundly healing.
I think there were a
whole lot of realizations.
And I absolutely thought
that I would die of leukemia,
and I just wanted to
find peace before I died.
>> And so how long were
you in Italy in the caves?
>> I'm not exactly sure, but I
think I was about seven months.
And I'm just about to
return there, which will
be really lovely, next week.
So that will be very special
to go back to the cave.
It was the Grotto of St. Francis
in a monastery just outside
of Assisi.
>> I recall the beautiful and
wonderful late Wayne Dyer speak
often and the very healing
energy of that whole area.
>> Yes.
>> So from Italy, you
returned to Australia?
>> Yes.
After a while, I found a great
deal of peace in the cave.
And I just wanted to
be with my children.
I wanted to have that peace in
my relationships, in my family.
And so I returned to Australia,
and I had more blood tests.
And the doctors said, well,
I was now in a remission,
but it was an
unexpected remission,
and it wouldn't last.
And they said, maybe a few
days, maybe a few weeks.
And I actually found that
a lot more challenging,
because when you know
you're going to die,
there are things that you need
to say, and do, and organize.
And I had said, and done,
and organized them all.
I'd given my children
away to their father,
I prepared my will,
and my funeral,
and wrote letters for the
children for the future,
and I had my whole
life all packed up
in this little suitcase,
all ready for the big trip,
and then the plane got canceled.
And I was faced
with, well, how much
do you unpack the suitcase?
How much do you live as if
you're really going to be here?
And it took me a while
to realize, of course,
that everybody lives
with a tremendous amount
of precariousness in their life.
They just don't know they do,
and that certainly I know.
And I suspect a
lot of our viewers
know that life can [SNAPS]
change in a moment,
and it's never the same again.
And if you don't know that,
it does take you by surprise
when it happens.
And I realize that
living with uncertainty
was the state of
just being human.
And so I went into general
naturopathic practice
a little bit reluctantly,
because I wasn't sure
that I wanted to
be a naturopath.
But within the first two
weeks, the first woman
with breast cancer came in.
And the day after, the first
person with AIDS came in,
and both of them
had been told they
wouldn't see Christmas,
which is what
I'd been told 15 months before.
And so I felt like
I'd met my people,
fellow travelers in the transit
lounge of their own life.
And my question to
people has always
been, what is it that stands in
the way of you being at peace?
And sometimes, that was, I'm
not at peace with myself,
I'm not at peace
with my history.
I don't love myself, I
don't know why I'm alive.
I don't-- I know I'm
here for something.
I don't know what it is.
My relationships are in tatters.
So those conversations
got ever deeper.
And then I began to see
that some of those people
didn't die on time if they were
given a frame, because doctors
only work in three
to six, six to 12.
It's always quarterly
installments.
I've never met anyone
given five to seven,
because they're talking about
a statistical group of people.
They're not talking
about as an individual.
And so many of these
people, I began
to see far outlive their
doctors' expectations.
And some of them are
still alive now when
they were given three months
to live 25 or more years ago.
But to me, it's not
about not dying.
It's about coming
alive and being alive.
And so it's not about, do
anything say you won't die.
It's do whatever so that you
really come alive and live.
Which is a beautiful
way for me to ask you,
in the experience of
everything that your life has
had so far, the adversity, the
physical, mental, emotional
trauma, it's
obviously, to sum up
in such a short period of
time, very difficult to do.
But you have learned without
doubt some key fundamental
living principles and
living philosophies
that are both physical,
mental, and emotional,
which now underpin the
programs and the retreats
that Quest for Life
Foundation offer.
So can I just get a
clearer understanding
of what you've
come to understand
as being the key
qualities that we
need to embrace on
our healing journey,
so that regardless of
what our challenges,
whether it's physical, mental,
emotional, that they are--
from what I'm hearing, there are
some really fundamental things
that we have to work with.
Can you share a little
bit more what they are?
>> Well, there's a great place
that you get to where you say,
that's it.
Something has to
change, and it's me.
I can't change the outer
circumstance of my life.
We call them the
Ds, that we might
hit a drama, a disappointment, a
disaster, a diagnosis, a death,
a divorce, a disfigurement, a
disability, a debt, a drought,
a downpour, a downturn.
It's lots of Ds.
>> The endless Ds.
And when you hit
this D, everything
that's second nature
to you doesn't work.
It might be second nature
to isolate yourself,
to go into an old pattern
of I do it myself.
It might be second nature to
you to not sleep, or sleep
all the time, or not
eat, or eat all the time.
It might be second nature
to you to blame other people
for your unhappiness.
But this D, whatever it
is, demands more from you
than you've ever had to draw on.
And you get to that great
place where you say, that's it.
Something's got to
change, and it's me.
And it's interesting
that we say, oh,
it's second nature for
me to think like this,
feel like this, react like this.
And we never question, well,
what's your first nature?
What's your essential
nature before you
took on the anxieties, the
limitations, the fears,
the beliefs about yourself?
And so when you hit that place,
and you want to be different,
then the whole universe
conspires to bring it about,
and you begin to find
the stepping stones.
And we find that there are
four particular qualities that
are universal in
people who attain
so-called spontaneous
remissions, people who
have been through
extraordinary grief
and then find peace, people
who have every reason
to feel embittered, and
grumpy, and resentful,
and who find a part
of themselves that
is beyond the pain.
And we call them the four Cs.
So the first is, we
need to regain control
over our response to life.
So the first C is the
difference between a reaction
and a response.
A reaction is literally a
reactivation of a pattern
that we've used before
that we use again
in the present moment.
And if we keep
reacting to life, we
keep assuring ourselves
that our future will
be a reflection of our past.
And a reaction is
actually felt in the body.
So we know it on an
epigenetic level.
If you continue to provide the
same chemistry within your body
over and over again, why
would anything change?
A response takes you
into new territory.
So we may need to weep
about it, rail about it,
scream about it, write about it,
talk about it until we can say,
yes.
That did happen, and
it happened to me.
And given that I'm a woman
in this circumstance,
what's an appropriate
response, not a reaction?
A reaction is when we feel a
victim of our circumstance.
A response is when we feel
empowered to make choices.
>> So what were some of the
very first tools that you would
teach somebody in order
to regain that control,
in order to start to, rather
than react but to take more
of a responsive, active,
participating role?
>> Well, in many different
ways, because firstly,
you need to be aware of where
do you react in your own body?
And it might be-- for
some, it's in the stomach.
For some, it's their heart
rate increases, their breathing
changes.
Their jaw might tense,
they might hold tension
in their shoulders.
So be aware of where you
reactivate in your own body.
And as soon as you become
aware of that reaction,
stop and do whatever it takes
to bring yourself back to quiet.
So whether that's do
some deep breathing,
whether that's excusing
yourself from a circumstance
until you feel more able to
respond and not just react.
It's also held in our language.
The language of
reaction contains words
like I can't, I should,
try, but, never, if only,
impossible, always.
That little group of
words, if we never
let those words come out of our
mouth but with consciousness,
we're home and
hosed, because those
are the words that hooks
back in to the patterns that
are second nature to us.
And so in order for
us to have awareness,
we have to find ways
of quietening the mind.
And for some, that will be
meditation, or mindfulness,
or Tai Chi, or being in nature,
listening to music, arranging
flowers, whatever.
It's a very individual
thing, but whatever
it is that reconnects you with
the stillness within yourself,
that's your job to make sure
that happens on a daily basis.
>> So what I'm hearing there
is that step number one
to regaining control is about
coming back into the present
moment grounding yourself,
becoming aware of your body,
becoming aware of the
language that you're using,
becoming aware of the senses
and the sensations that
you're experiencing.
And from there, we are stepping
into a place of mindfulness.
>> Yes.
My most consistent
spiritual practice
is simply to come to
my senses, and that's
what we say to people when
they're having a panic attack.
Come to your senses.
And we say that, because we
know that the body is always
in the present moment.
The mind's forever jumping
five seconds, weeks, months,
years into the future,
five seconds, weeks,
months, years into the past.
So it's the constant
practice of being
aware of your weight, your
posture, how the chair supports
your body, the touch
of your clothing,
the air against your
skin, all of the sounds
within and outside
of this space.
It's impossible to have
a fully-fledged panic
and do that at the same time.
And the more you do that, the
more the mind comes to rest.
And when mind is
at rest, you have
access to your intuition,
creativity, wisdom, humor,
spontaneity, all of those
qualities that we so value,
especially if we're
dealing with a D.
So we want to have
access to that,
but we only have access to
that when the mind is quiet.
>> Beautiful.
So what's our second C?
>> Second C is a
commitment to living,
and that recognizes that the
opposite of death is birth,
not life, and that
consciousness is indestructible,
that whether you think of it
as life, soul, energy, spirit,
it doesn't really matter.
But I've been with many,
many people when they die,
and it's really obvious
that someone leaves.
So the second C is really about
being in right relationship
to our physical, mental,
emotional aspects,
that you're not your body.
You have a body, and you need
to nourish it appropriately.
And that's a whole day's
lecture in itself, really,
because human beings
have been eating
slow food, seasonal,
local, organic, whole food
for millennia.
It's only lately
that we've started
interfering so dramatically
with our food supply.
So we need to nourish
our bodies appropriately.
We need to rest
them, because this
is a bit of a culture
that soldiers on.
We need to exercise them,
because it's a whole system
of pumps in our bodies.
And we need to know what fluffs
us up, what makes us feel good.
You're not your mind.
You have a mind,
and it's your job
to quieten the mind so you
have access to those qualities
that we were talking about.
And it's also your job to keep
your mind in good company.
Don't hang out with turkeys.
Be in good company.
Be with people, environments,
activities that uplift,
inspire, and encourage you.
We're not our emotions.
We have feelings.
So what I'm hearing here is that
the second C around commitment
is also--
it includes taking
accountability
for your choices--
>> Yes, absolutely.
>> --not just committing
to the journey of healing,
but taking responsibility,
and accounting--
being accountable for the
choices that you're making
along the process.
>> And a lot of people don't
recognize they have choice
until they do.
And I think that's the
great gift of suffering,
is that it does get us
to a place of recognizing
that a lot of things I
don't have choice about,
but I do have choice about
how I'm going to embrace
the challenge that I have.
And so I'm not my feelings.
I have feelings.
And there's a big
difference between, this
is how it feels to
be, portray a feeling,
angry, that I am angry.
>> Yes.
>> So we'd say watch,
out what you attach.
I am, too.
Maybe I am soul, spirit,
life, being, energy.
And right now, I feel angry.
It's not who I am.
It is what I am
feeling, and there
is a big difference in that.
And so we unpack, of
course, all of these things
in a lot more depth in
our retreats and so on.
But it's really
about, if we want
to find peace, how do we
find the peace that passes
all understanding, is to
anchor your sense of self
in that which is beyond change,
because even if you live
to 110, your body
will get saggy,
and baggy, and wrinkly,
and gray, and bits
will fall off and not work.
And so you don't want to
anchor your sense of self
in your physical body or in
your mind, which is forever
jumping into the
future or the past,
or into your feelings,
which change all the time.
So the peace that
passes all understanding
is to anchor your sense of self
in that which is beyond change.
The second C is also
about communication,
because a lot of us are not in
clear communion with ourselves,
nor do we have the capacity
to communicate skillfully
to others.
And I think that's a lifelong
journey, because even when
you think you're a
fabulous communicator,
you'll get misinterpreted, or
misconstrued, or misunderstood.
And the third aspect
of the second C
are issues of forgiveness,
because a lot of people
use what's happened
to them in the past
as an excuse for their
behavior in the present.
>> It's such a big one.
>> So forgiveness.
Yes, forgiveness is a
five-day workshop, definitely.
>> Oh, a life journey.
>> And I was at a conference
many years ago in San Francisco
when a 6' 5" transsexual in
a frock stood up and said,
"I've just realized that
forgiveness is giving up all
hopes for a better past."
And I thought that was spot on.
That nailed it.
We might need to weep
about it, rail about it,
scream about it, write about
it until we get to a place
where yeah, that did
happen, but I'm no longer
reacting in the present as
if still wounded by the past.
>> Mm-hmm.
And defining myself as such.
>> Yes, and that's freedom.
>> Yes.
>> Because we no longer have
to feel wounded by anything.
>> This is amazing.
We're only up to the second
C, and already there's
been a wealth of
knowledge and wisdom
being shared to our audience.
So what is the third C?
>> The third C is a
sense of challenge.
We thrive on challenge.
Human beings love challenge, as
long as it's not overwhelming.
So challenge is
also about how do we
make meaning out
of the unthinkable,
the unimaginable things
that do happen to us?
And of course, I guess I've made
meaning out of my experiences
by choosing to do
the work that I do.
And many people make meaning
out of their suffering
by how they choose to
live in the present
now and spend their time.
And so that third C is
really about how do we
make every moment a sacred
moment, every encounter
a holy encounter,
rather than feeling
that this has no
meaning, I'm in despair,
and I don't see any path out.
And the fourth C is our
sense of connectedness,
that we have a profound sense
of connection to our own innate
spirit, that we have our
sense of place of belonging,
that we've got our mates,
our loved ones, the people
that we can be real with, that
we feel a connection to land,
to country, to the cycles
of nature, to the cosmos.
It can be read at many,
many different levels.
But it's that deep
sense of connection,
that I'm a part of the whole and
have a place within that whole.
>> So these four seas, in
that case, really underpin.
They're the living
philosophies that are
taught in all of your programs?
>> Yes.
>> Quest for Life?
>> Yeah, because if
you think about it,
when I started seeing people
with cancer who didn't die when
they were expected to,
I'd love, as a naturopath,
I'd love to say they all drink
carrot juice and took 5,000
milligrams of vitamin
C three times a day,
but it wouldn't be true.
They did all kinds of things.
They found their spirit, though.
And so when I really
began looking at it,
it was those four qualities
that they had in common.
And then I found that whether
you were grieving, whether you
had sexual abuse
in your childhood,
whether you were
dealing with depression,
suicide, whatever it
was those, those four Cs
were equally appropriate.
Because obviously, when the
unthinkable, the unimaginable,
the unexpected happens,
you want to feel
that you can make an
appropriate response,
not feel a victim
that can only react
to it, that your
commitment to living
is that you have a deep
reverence for your own life,
and you express that reverence
by how you care for yourself
physically, mentally,
emotionally, and spiritually,
that you're in clear
communion with yourself
and with others, that you have
the capacity to forgive and let
go what happened in the
past, that every moment is
a meaningful moment,
every encounter becomes
a holy, a special
encounter, and where
you feel a profound
sense of connection
to your own innate spirit,
to the spirit that
enlivens all of creation.
Because if we really
get that, then how
could I do to another what
I wouldn't do to myself?
Because you would see
the other as yourself.
And obviously, the
person who feels
completely out of
control with their life.
And they can only helplessly
react to everything
that happens to them, and that
their commitment to living
is all around, I'm going to be
happy at some future time, when
things are different from
how they are right now,
that they're not in clear
communication with themselves
or anyone else, have
no capacity to forgive
or let go the
traumas of the past,
that all their challenges
are overwhelming
and nothing has
meaning for them,
and they have no
sense of connection
to themselves or to anyone else.
I think common
sense would tell us
that that person's
quality of life
won't be near so good,
nor near so healing
as one where you feel the
presence of those qualities.
>> So if somebody was to come
along to a Quest for Life
program, and they
run for five days?
>> Yes.
Well, we have weekend
programs as well
>> Weekend programs as well.
>> But through most of
our retreats are five days
in length.
>> So can you give me an example
of what somebody would expect
if they were coming Quest for
Life to be helped in overcoming
depression or anxiety for
whatever the experience
in their life that
has triggered that?
And they're there
to learn the four
Cs of taking back
control, and commitment,
and learning to take on a
challenge that's positive,
and learning how to
reconnect in their lives?
What are the kind of
processes that they
would expect to experience?
>> Well, I guess firstly, I
think I'm always deeply touched
that people will travel so far
to find a safe place where they
can actually have their story.
Because most people are wanting
to fix you, or change you,
or make you better, or to
pull you out of where you are.
Whereas for me, the first
step is allowing someone
to be fully exactly where they
are without any need for them
to be any different
from who they are.
So rather than seeing
people as flawed in any way,
it's to provide a very safe
environment in which they
can perhaps utter what's been
unutterable up until then.
And I find that until you
provide that environment,
people aren't ready to move.
Because once people feel
like someone gets me,
that person gets what
my world is like,
then people are ready to
move, but not before then.
And people can try and
drag them out of there,
or any number of things,
or finding them tedious
when people are in
despair, and depressed,
or whatever it might be.
But until someone
completely allows
you to have the
experience that you're
having, then you're in a place
where you're ready to have
a different experience.
And so by giving
people a framework
of the four Cs,
which are really,
very common-sense based.
They're not kind of
challenging for anyone,
whether you're working with
prisoners in Long Bay, where
I've worked, or in hospices, or
with children, or politicians,
or whoever it is, those
four Cs resonate so far
for more than 100,000 people.
And so people come because
they want to have a different
experience than they're--
they want to find the part
of themselves that's more
than what's happened to them.
And so that framework
of the four Cs,
and then unpacking
that and helping people
to understand how to take good
care of their physical body.
>> So you're teaching them
life skills as well around
lifestyle.
>> Absolutely, absolutely.
It's around nutrition, and
exercise, and how to sleep,
and how to switch your
mind off at night so
that you can get some deep
rest and some good sleep.
It's about finding more
skillful ways of communicating
around your feelings, not only
to have the awareness yourself,
but to be able to communicate
that to your loved ones.
We help people to
identify what are
the activities you engage in?
What goes on in your body?
What are the things
that you do in your life
when you're at the
end of your tether?
And we know that
people have headaches,
and digestive upsets,
and they can't sleep,
and they abuse
drugs and alcohol.
And they blame, and
they resent, and they
get clumsy, and forgetful,
and they can fill a whiteboard
with all of the behaviors.
And it's really useful to
look at these behaviors,
because these are the
symptoms of not being present.
This is when you have
an emotional backlog
that you haven't dealt with.
And so we get people
literally to write up,
what are your half dozen
favorite ways of manifesting
stress so that you know
that about yourself?
And then we also get
them to reflect on,
what are the activities,
the environments,
the things that you do
or have in your life
that give you back that
deep sense of connection
to your own spirit?
And people come up
with being in nature,
listening to music, sunsets,
music, making music, singing,
dancing, the grandchildren,
having a cuppa with friends,
preparing a meal for friends.
And they can fill a whiteboard
with all of those things.
And when you look
at those things,
those are all
present-time activities.
We love doing those
things, because we're
in the present moment.
>> And they're creating
meaning and purpose.
>> Yes.
>> And therefore, a motive to
want to change and a motive
to stay in the present.
>> Yes.
And so we get them to write up
those half-dozen favorite ways
of fluffing themselves up,
of replenishing themselves,
of putting themselves
back together.
And we suggest, put
both those lists up
on the bathroom mirror.
And then every day when
you're brushing your teeth
or gazing lovingly at yourself
in the mirror, those days
when you can't pull yourself
away from your own reflection,
look down those
lists, and make sure
that none of those behaviors
on the list of the stressors
is happening, and that you
are doing those things that
replenish you, whether
it's meditation, or ritual,
or having fresh flowers in
the house, or whatever it is.
Make sure that you are creating
the environment in which you
feel physically, mentally,
emotionally, and spiritually
well and alive.
>> It really is.
It really is a process
of practicing mindfulness
in every moment.
And we're so used to, as you
said right from the beginning,
we're so used to the autopilot
and living from this place
of just not even realizing
what our thoughts are
or you know getting
into the car,
and driving to the supermarket,
and not even realizing
that you changed gear
because you've just become
so accustomed to these habits.
And the process of
creating new habits,
do you find that five days
is certainly a great start?
But I would think that
also, you send people
away with a very
clear understanding
of the sort of things that
they need to continue doing?
>> Yes.
By the time they leave, they
have a clear roadmap for life.
And it's not for us to
tell another person what
we think they should do.
We help people define what are
the relevant things for them
in their life.
And so by the time
they leave, they
feel empowered to make
choices, and they absolutely
know when they're choosing
not to from then on.
And it is reflected
in our language,
and in the way we
care for ourselves,
and the company we
keep, and a whole range
of different things.
So by the time
people leave, they
feel like, I know
exactly what I need
to do in my own life in
order for me to move forward
in a way that's really
meaningful for the individual.
>> I've often heard you speak
about how trauma and traumatic
experiences is actually an
opportunity or a catalyst
for an individual to grow, for
them to understand their own
spirit, to embrace themselves,
and to even learn how to create
a life more of
meaning and purpose.
How can we encourage
people who are feeling
stuck in their
circumstances to maybe start
to begin to shift towards
looking at their challenge
as an opportunity to grow?
>> Well, hopefully people have
some love and support around
them that will help them to
see that they actually do have
choice, not in what's
happened to them,
but certainly in how
they're going to approach,
make meaning out of whatever
has happened to them.
And I guess that's the upside
of suffering, because most of us
are so happy with
mediocrity, where we
go through life a bit asleep.
And we don't see the
wonder and the beauty,
and we don't connect with
that, because we're so
preoccupied with the mind.
And to have a quiet
mind is bliss.
That's heaven.
Heaven's not a
geographical destination.
We make of every moment
a heaven or a hell
depending upon the quality
of our consciousness
and where it's absorbed.
And if it's absorbed in
the past or in the future,
then we squander all of the
possibilities of the present.
And if we want to have access
to those qualities of creativity
and insight, wisdom,
if we want to be
able to hear the voice
of our intuition,
then we have to
have a quiet mind.
Otherwise, we're just listening
to the past or the future.
And then we miss out on
everything that's here now.
>> And so our breath, and to
use our breath to come back
into that space?
>> Yeah
>> And I know that meditation
is something that you have,
as you say, you've
done since you were 17.
>> Yeah.
>> Do you teach a lot of
different types of meditation?
>> I think it's important to
find the technique that works
for the individual.
I would say to people, never
make the technique right
and you wrong.
Shop around until you find
a voice that works for you,
or a technique
that works for you,
or music that works for
you, or whatever it is.
But don't think that you have
to get it right because somebody
else benefits from something.
See, one of my
greatest blessings,
really, has been my
knees, because if I
don't move consciously,
although I've got new ones now.
I had them replaced in
the last couple of years.
But I have to move
consciously, otherwise I
rip ligaments and tendons.
And I got rid of the cartilage
many, many years ago.
So on a good day,
they're a great blessing,
because they keep me very
firmly in the present moment.
And so it's how you choose
to see things, really.
Because you could grump and
groan over chronic pain,
or you could say, because I
need to be very mindful in how
I move in my body,
then that connects me
with the present moment.
So for me, it's been, I think,
more than meditation, even.
It's the constant practice
of coming to my senses,
because that's what I've needed
to do throughout my life.
And even though that
means that I do live
with chronic pain
and some challenges,
I see those as great blessings,
because they've certainly
helped me to focus more
on the present moment.
And certainly, our
one of our retreats
is taking control
of chronic pain.
And a lot of people who've
had horrendous injuries
or been bedridden for
years have regained
their life, and their
purpose, and have changed
their view of the story.
So I'm very grateful
to have a story,
because without that story,
we wouldn't be here having
this conversation.
I wouldn't wish it
on anyone either.
But I wouldn't
change any of it now,
because those are the
things that have pushed me
into parts of
myself I would never
have gone to explore
otherwise, and they've
been a great blessing to me.
And they've also broken me
open to a lot more compassion
and understanding
for other people
who are likewise suffering.
And I think to be in the
company of great suffering
without trying to fix it, or
change it, or make it better
is the first step in healing.
>> Petrea, you are, as always,
such an amazing inspiration
of wisdom, of knowledge.
I have one more question
for you to answer,
and we're asking
all of our speakers.
>> The work of Bruce Lipton,
the work of Jody Spencer,
and philosophers have been
saying it for all time,
and that is, we are
what we believe.
And if the I Am statement is one
of the most powerful statements
that we can ever
tell ourselves, what
is your I Am that you wake
up to and remind yourself
of every day?
>> I think it would be just that
I am a humble servant of life.
>> Beautiful, beautiful.
Thank you so much
for joining us.
>> It's a pleasure.
>> Thank you so
much for sharing.
>> Thank you.
Thank you.
>> Thanks, Petrea.